Week 5 D3: Save the Universe

Build a game of battling alien spaceships using Javascript.

Earth has been attacked by a horde of aliens! 
You are the captain of the USS HelloWorld, 
on a mission to destroy every last alien ship.

Battle the aliens as you try to destroy them with your lasers.

There are six alien ships. 

The aliens' weakness is that they are too logical 
and attack one at a time: 

they will wait to see the outcome of a battle 
before deploying another alien ship. 

Your strength is that you have the initiative 
and get to attack first. 

However, you do not have targeting lasers 
and can only attack the aliens in order. 

After you have destroyed a ship, 
you have the option to make a hasty retreat.


A game round would look like this:

    1. You attack the first alien ship

    2. IF the ship survives, 
    THEN it attacks you

    3. IF you survive, 
    THEN you attack the ship again

    4. IF it survives, 
    THEN it attacks you again … etc

    5. IF you destroy the ship, 
    you have the option to attack the next ship in the fleet 
    OR or to retreat to safety

IF you retreat, 
then the game is over
    // perhaps leaving the game open for further developments or options

If you destroy all of the aliens, 
then you win the game 

IF you are destroyed, 
then you lose the game 


Ship Properties
hull is the same as hitpoints. 
If hull reaches 0 or less, 
the ship is destroyed

firepower is the amount of damage 
done to the hull of the target 
with a successful hit

accuracy is the chance between 
0 and 1 that the ship will hit its target

Your spaceship, should have the following properties:
hull - 20
firepower - 5
accuracy - .7

The alien ships should each have the following ranged properties determined randomly:

hull - between 3 and 6
firepower - between 2 and 4
accuracy - between .6 and .8

You could be battling six alien ships each with unique values.

Example use of accuracy to determine a hit:

if (Math.random() < alien[0].accuracy) {
    console.log('You have been hit!');
}

Where to begin?
Read over the specifications. Make sure you understand them. 
If you do not understand them, try to clarify them for yourself.

Plan the game. This is an act of simplification.

From these programming principles: .

Use pseudo code to get a sketch of your game first.

Avoid Creating a YAGNI (You aren't going to need it) 

- You should not try to add functionality until you need it.

Do the simplest thing that could possibly work.

Often, beginning something is an act of 
creative inspiration to find the simplest possible case. 

The first step is not necessarily a matter of logical deduction. 

Once you have a few 'clues' you can follow the trail of crumbs to a logical conclusion.

Actors and then actions
A good rule of thumb is start with the actors and then the actions. 
What actors do we need? In this case, we need our spaceship and the alien spaceships. 

An action these ships can take is to attack something. 

Perhaps a ship object (an actor) could therefore have an attack method (an action).

A repeating action in the game is that these ships attack 
each other until one of them has been destroyed. 
This might necessitate a loop or multiple loops.

Start simpler than the instructions suggest
Keep these five things in mind when planning and coding your game:

Begin even simpler than the specifications suggest. 
In this case, perhaps just start with one alien ship instead of many alien ships, 
and get the code for one ship working first.

Root out any 'gotchas' that you really ought to foresee. 
In this case, will we really want nested loops 
-- one for a battle, one for iterating over aliens)? 
How will we exit one loop and then exit the parent loop? 

Perhaps keeping it to one loop somehow will help us avoid unnecessary difficulties.

When coding, form a solid and testable foundation before 
building upon it with more functionality. 

In this case, is there a bug where an alien can attack after it has been destroyed? 

Better fix that bug before increasing the complexity of the code.

When you have a piece of functionality tested and working, commit it. 

Try not to commit broken code. 
Unsure of when to commit? 
Commit when something works. 
You want to save working code.

PSUEDDO CODE: 
- Make the ship object.

- Make a single alien ship object.

- Simulate a battle between your ship and a single alien ship first.

- Make a method for your ship that will attack a given target. 

The target can be an input to the method.
- Run the method and pass it the alien ship.

- Make it so the method reduces the target's hull by the firepower of the USS Schwarz.

- Make a game object
- Make a method in the game object that will run a 'check win' 
for the health of the alien(s) and/or the USS Schwarzenegger. 

If the hull is 0 or less, display a message that the ship went kabloo-ey.
- Make it so the alien will only be hit if a Math.random call is below the accuracy threshold.

- Make a method for the alien ship to attack a target.
- At a status console log for the end of the round.

- PROBLEM: If you make the alien ship go kabloo-ey, then the alien should not then be able to attack you. Fix this.
- Make it so the attacks will keep occuring until someone's hull is at 0. 

Isolate what it is that you want to repeat.
- Make many alien ships with a Class. Make each object slightly different . . .
- hull between 3 and 6, firepower between 2 and 4, accuracy between 0.6 and 0.8.

EX: 
this.hull = Math.floor(Math.random() * 4) + 3;
this.firepower = Math.floor(Math.random() * 3) + 2;
this.accuracy = (Math.floor(Math.random() * 3) + 6) / 10;

- Make a loop that calls the Class and generates alien ships. 
Push those constructed objects into a predefined array. 
Start with 6 ships (the loop should run 6 times).

- Try out the game with the first alien ship in the array.
- Run the battle with all ships in turn.
- Move functions into the game object.
- Move on to the bonuses.